Welcome back up to this point.
We've learned about codes just executing from top to bottom just in a straight line.
We've learned about conditionals where we can add an if statement and have it go one way else go the
other way and then we also learned about if else and else if so if Smith I'll see if else and then what
if we wanted to do something like this something where we keep doing it over and over.
And that's called looping and that's where we're gonna learn about in this video.
And as you can see in our online javascript looping we're going to go through all of these and this
video.
Let's get started.
Have an empty script tag here that again is attached to our Asia email and let's start off with maybe
a to do list and a To Do List has well should be an array and we want to have maybe clean room.
We want to have the brush teeth maybe exercise should definitely study some javascript and finally what
we should eat healthy.
All right.
So we have a to do list.
Let's say that we wanted to add an exclamation mark at the end of these two star items.
I mean these are all really important and we want to emphasize that.
But I mean that is kind of tedious right.
I have to go one by one and add an exclamation mark add an exclamation mark and imagine if to do this
was hundreds of lines and as programmers we want to do things efficiently.
That's what we have machines for.
So let's add some looping to this to do a loop and JavaScript.
One of the main ways you can do it is called a for loop and you're gonna learn a new syntax here and
be warned it looks confusing at first but it's one of those things again you have to do it a few times
and you'll get the hang of it.
So the first one is variable i equals zero.
Will do high is less than to dos dot length and then we'll do pi plus plus.
Don't worry I'll explain what this means.
We have the curly brackets.
And then within here for now let's just wait and explain what's happening.
So I'm saying four which is a javascript towards saying we're going to do a loop now in this loop the
first thing we're gonna do is we're going to say I equals zero.
So it's just a random variable eyes.
It's common to be used in a for loop stands for an index.
So I starts off with the zero.
We have a semicolon which means that's the end of the expression.
We just assigned the eye variable the zero and then in the next line says I which is at the moment zero.
If that is less than the deuce length and to deuce length we've never seen this before it's saying how
long is the list in this case one two three four five so zero is greater than five if that's the case
then run this loop and then when you're done do high plus plus which means I plus 1.
So let's go through that.
First off to do that length.
If I go if I copy this I do to do start the plant I get five five items I could also do Hello Dot length
and I get eight so one two three four five six seven eight so length just tells us how many items in
the list and if I do variable i equals zero while I's zero but if I do I plus plus and I look at I again
I see that it's one if I do I plus plus again.
Well I get to.
So this is incrementing I.
So what we're doing is we're saying start off with zero as long as I is less than five then run what's
ever in this block.
And once you're done with it add one two I.
So let's see what happens if I do console dialogue.
I hear let's save and refresh 0 1 2 3 4.
So we're doing a loop where it starts off with zero.
Then we add one.
It's now 1.
Then we add another one to another one to three.
And another one two four and how come we don't have five here because as soon as I equals five that's
going to match the to dos length and the loop stops.
So that's how we tell the loop to stop OK.
So how can we do this if we wanted to add exclamation mark on the end of these.
Well we can access to dos
by because it's an array by eye because the first go around I will be zero which will be clean room
then one which is brush teeth then two which is exercise 3 which is studied javascript and 4 which is
eat healthy.
So let's double check that if I do two dos I and safe refresh and I should change this back to I.
There you go otherwise if I do this this actually won't run much as because well this is five equals
five so it's never gonna it's never going to go through the loop so let's change that back to I am refresh
clean room brush teeth exercise study javascript eat healthy.
Perfect.
So now I can just do I plus exclamation mark.
Let's refresh look at that.
That's how important these items are.
But if I do to do or to dos Well my two dos don't actually have these exclamation marks we've just console
log them but we haven't actually changed that to do right.
So let's do that
we can now say that to dos I equals to dos high plus exclamation mark.
So let's see I refresh.
Nothing happens by now if I check to dos.
Look at that I have exclamation marks in each of my two dos.
And again to break that down we're saying clean room now equals clean room plus exclamation mark very
cool.
OK.
Let's learn a few others actually before we do.
What if we want to cross this off the list maybe we want to cross them off because we've done them well
we can do something like to do set up Pop.
If you remember that's a an array method pop that removes the last item.
So if I go save and refresh I get to dos I pop is not a function why is that.
Well because we're saying clean room pop and that's a string.
What we want to do is to use dot pop because that's the array.
So if I save and refresh at let's see what we have an hour to dos clean room and brush teeth.
What is that.
Well because initially this was zero.
And to do list length was five.
But then because we popped it this changed to four and this to one and then three and two.
So as you can see we removed eat healthy study javascript and exercise but because our to do is length
changed well it stopped halfway through.
So what's one way that we can fix that issue.
Well we can do variable to do that length to dos.
Length equals to dos dot length.
So now this variables 5.
So if I just do the variable to dos length.
This is gonna remember because it's only gonna run once it's gone.
This is gonna run then we're gonna assign five to two deuce length and then this is gonna loop over
so if I see this and refresh.
Let's look at two dos.
Look at that we finished all of our to dos very cool.
Let me show you a another option which is the while loop the while loop goes something like this.
While let's create a variable here variable counter
counter one we're gonna say that that is zero and we're gonna say while counter one is less than 10.
In that case I want to console log
counter 1 and then I want to counter one plus plus.
Remember we're doing we're adding so every time we're increasing counter by 1.
Let's just see what happens here.
If I save this and refresh 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 and then it stops because well as soon as this it's 10
this is no longer right.
So this part of the block doesn't run
OK can I do something maybe the other way around where we say that the counter is 10 and this time we
want to count down.
So while the counter is 10 keep going and otherwise stop.
And the way we do that we obviously want to subtract.
We don't want to keep going.
Eleven or twelve because otherwise it's gonna keep going forever.
The way we do that is minus minus which is the exact opposite.
So it subtracts 1.
Let's see what happens.
Ten nine eight seven six five four three two one.
There you go.
Now out of curiosity what will happen if I go like this where the number just keeps increasing from
10 to 11 to well infinity rate is just going to keep going up and you can do this in Google Chrome if
you want.
It's actually pretty pretty entertaining.
What happens is it just keeps going forever and ever you'll just get a list of all these things.
And it's called an infinite loop an infinite loop means it pretty much goes infinitely except it doesn't
really because eventually Google Chrome is going to crash it's gonna say Hey I can't handle all this
information you're driving me crazy and it's going to stop working OK.
So we learn the for loop we learned a while.
What else do we have.
We have the do.
So this is called the do while loop and it's a little bit different than the while we start off with
do.
Then curly brackets and we say counter let's call a counter to this time where do variable counter 2
equals 10 and do counter 2 plus plus.
So add counter to and also console logged counter 2 and we want to move console log at the top because
this way I'll start with 10 then increase loops.
This should be subtracted.
So we do 10 it's gonna log 10 then it's going to subtract.
So the next time that comes around here it's gonna be nine and then we do while and we give a condition
here.
So the conditions gonna be counter to is going to be greater than zero.
OK so let's see what happens here.
I refresh.
Ten nine eight seven six five four three two one.
It looks like we just did the same thing as the wild loop didn't we so let me just test that out.
Let's refresh your and we see that we have ten through one for the while loop and ten through one through
the do while loop.
So what is the difference here.
The difference is that with a while loop we check the condition first.
So we say is kind of one greater than zero.
OK then do the stuff versus the do while loop that says do the stuff first and then do counter to.
Let me just demonstrate that point if we do 10 here and 10 let's refresh.
I only get one.
Let's check something here.
I'm going to say this is the while loop and this is the do while loop save in a refresh so it looks
like the do while ran but the while loop never did because well 10 equals to 10.
This fails and the loop doesn't run versus the do while loop that does this first and then checks the
condition if they should loop.
So that's the difference between these two but to be honest with you most of the time you're gonna be
using a for loop and the for loop is why you're going to get used to but there's actually a better way
of doing it.
If you look at the section outline we see that I have one last one which is for each.
And it says new in my script five.
So as you remember javascript is constantly evolving and Atma script 5 was a new standard that added
that for each method.
So what is the for each method.
Well I'm going to show you the difference between a for loop and a for each.
They both do the same thing but tell me which one looks better.
So with here we'll say console dot log
high.
So we're just logging the I and with a for each loop I can do two dos dot for each function I console
dot log.
Hi might look a little bit confusing but let's just try it out.
Let's see what happens.
So it looks like a line 10 is printing out 0 1 2 3 4 and line 14 is printing out clear room brush teeth
exercise study javascript.
Eat healthy.
What are we doing here.
Well the for each.
It takes an array.
In this case the to dos and it asks for an argument that is tell me what to do with it so the action
that we want to perform on the to dos can be represented in a function so I say function and this function
receives the argument of I which is the each individual item in the tattoos.
So I could just say to do here and to do and refresh is are still be the exact same.
So you see here that we're not necessarily accessing the index like we are with this one because here
in order to get the to dos I had to do two dos square bracket I five refresh.
OK.
In that case now it's all the same.
But how do I access the index within the for each.
Well the second parameter and the second argument that it receives is the eye the index.
So now if I do my and refresh 0 1 2 3 4 so it's the same thing as doing this in the for loop and refresh
and look at that now by looking at these two.
Which one tells you more about what it does.
This one or this one.
Let's read it in an English to dos for each run a function that console logs that to do and the index
vs..
Well frankly this looks confusing so for each is a really really great method that they've added to
the language that really simplifies things.
Most people might get confused by this part.
The function was just to show you how powerful for it is we can actually do this.
I'm going to take out the function and I'm going to call it log to dos and now all I have to do is have
a function and call it log to dos and now I'm going to comment this out.
It's going to do the exact same thing but I can now use LOC to dos in other places.
So I can now do let's say I have another list that has maybe exclamation marks like we did in the first
one.
To dos.
Important.
So now I can do to do is important for each and use the same function log to dos I save and refresh
and look at that.
We have these to dos as well so you can see that it's very extensible.
Now the one caveat I want to show you with for each is that it's a new standard as we do with all new
standards.
We should check that they work on all browsers so if you remember we had.
Can I use dot com that we use for this and we use it at C Ss to make sure that our CSX 3 features like
Box shadow and transitions work on all the browsers.
So let's do that let's two for each and you see here at my script five for each.
It looks like well full support.
Everything looks good.
We just have opera many that has partial support so it looks pretty good unless we're really worried
about Opera Mini.
We can use for each in the browser.
And just to test if we open up our console Well we can definitely see that an array has for each.
So there you have it we had the for loop the while loop the do while loop and then finally for each
in the next video we're going to expand on our Facebook example and have multiple users so that we can
loop through the database of multiple users and see if the user name and password match any of those
I'll see in the next one.